Documentation for the IF-THEN-ELSE idiom (#1295)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/idiomatic/007if-then-else.md

# Idiom 7: Use Boolean operators in actions, not `IF-THEN-ELSE`

## Description

> TLA+ provides an `IF-THEN-ELSE` operator, and it can be pretty tempting to use it for flow control as it's done in procedural programming. However, TLA+ is about transitions over a state machine, and a transition-defining action declared with `IF-THEN-ELSE` can be more complex than 2 actions declared without it. Considering that any expression in the form `IF b THEN x ELSE y` with `x` and `y` being booleans (and most TLA+ expressions are booleans) can be rewritten as `(b /\ x) \/ (!b /\ y)`, there's a pattern we can apply to get rid of some potentially troubled `IF-THEN-ELSE` definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLA+ provides an `IF-THEN-ELSE` operator, and it can be pretty tempting to use it for flow control, as it's done in procedural programming. However, TLA+ is about transitions over a state machine, and a transition-defining action declared with `IF-THEN-ELSE` can be more complex than 2 actions declared without it. Considering that any expression of the form `IF b THEN x ELSE y`, where `x` and `y` are Booleans, can be rewritten as `(b /\ x) \/ (~b /\ y)`, there's a pattern we can apply to get rid of some potentially troublesome `IF-THEN-ELSE` definitions.
```

> The `IF-THEN-ELSE` operator can be used either to define a value or to branch some action as a sort of flow control. Defining values with `IF-THEN-ELSE` is common practice and is similar to the use of `IF` expressions on declarative programming languages. However, flow control in TLA+ can be done naturally by behavior definition through actions, making the use of `IF-THEN-ELSE` for flow control unnecessary. This idiom aims to clarify different usages of `IF-THEN-ELSE` expressions keeping in mind the TLA+ essence of declaring actions to define sets of transitions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `IF-THEN-ELSE` operator can be used either to define a value, or to branch some action as a sort of flow control. Defining values with `IF-THEN-ELSE` is common practice and is similar to the use of `IF` expressions in declarative programming languages. However, flow control in TLA+ can be done naturally by behavior definition through actions, making the use of `IF-THEN-ELSE` for flow control unnecessary. This idiom aims to clarify different usages of `IF-THEN-ELSE` expressions, keeping in mind the TLA+ essence of declaring actions to define transitions. 
```

Author: I meant it in the strict sense, buy your example is actually a good one to be included in the "When to use" section

## When to use `IF-THEN-ELSE`

### When the result is not Boolean

> When the `IF-THEN-ELSE` expression doesn't evaluate to a boolean value, it cannot be rewritten using boolean operators, so this idiom doesn't apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `IF-THEN-ELSE` expression doesn't evaluate to a boolean value, it cannot be rewritten using boolean operators, so this idiom doesn't apply. For example:
```

```tla
SafeDiv(x, y) == IF y /= 0 THEN x/y ELSE 0
```

### When the result is a state formula

State formulas are formulas that don't contain any action operator (e.g. primed variables, `UNCHANGED`). Using `IF-THEN-ELSE` on this type of formula can make it easier to read in some situations, and don't come with any disadvantage. This example state formula uses `IF-THEN-ELSE` to return a boolean value: 

```tla
ValidIdentity(person) == IF Nationalized(person) THEN ValidId(person) ELSE ValidPassport(person)
```

Although it could be rewritten with boolean operators, it doesn't read as nicely:

```tla
ValidIdentity(person) == \/ /\ Nationalized(person)
                            /\ ValidId(person)
                         \/ /\ !Nationalized(person)
                            /\ ValidPassport(person)
```

## When (and how) *not* to use `IF-THEN-ELSE`

Mixing `IF-THEN-ELSE` expressions with action operators introduces unnecessary branching to definitions that could be self-contained and look more like a transition definition. 

```tla
Withdraw(amount) == IF balance >= amount 
                     THEN /\ balance' = balance - amount
                          /\ response' = "SUCCESS"

>                      ELSE /\ UNCHANGED<balance>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                     ELSE /\ UNCHANGED balance
```

                          /\ response' = "FAILURE"
```

We could separate the two branches into their own actions with clarifying names and explicit conditions, and use a disjunction between the two actions instead of the `IF-THEN-ELSE` block:

```tla
WithdrawSuccess(amount) == /\ balance >= amount 
                           /\ balance' = balance - amount
                           /\ response' = "SUCCESS"
                            
WithdrawFailure(amount) == /\ balance < amount 
                           /\ response' = "FAILURE"

>                            /\ UNCHANGED<balance> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                           /\ UNCHANGED balance 
```

                            
Withdraw(amount) == WithdrawSuccess(amount) \/ WithdrawFailure(amount)
```

## Advantages

- Each action declares fewer transitions, so it's easier to reason about it

> - A disjunction of actions is closer to a union of transition sets than an `IF-THEN-ELSE` expression

Author: I mean the set of transitions derived from an action

> - A disjunction of actions is closer to a union of transition sets than an `IF-THEN-ELSE` expression

Reviewer: I know what you meant, but as a general rule, I'd recommend caution with terminology, because, especially with TLA+, it's easy for someone to misunderstand this and assume there is a TLA+ expression/construct that is a literal set.
We have a lot of documentation (and papers) on the treatment of transition systems, full of terminology (e.g. https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/tutorials/symbmc.html), and I'd like to advocate against diverging on terminology in the docs. 
This might come across as nitpicking, but Igor and I have spent many hours discussing terminology in docs, and you become sensitive to this kind of stuff.

> - A disjunction of actions is closer to a union of transition sets than an `IF-THEN-ELSE` expression

Author: Not at all, I'll totally agree with consistent terminology, I just didn't know/recall the standard term here, sorry! I've quickly scrolled through the doc but I'm still not sure about the best term here. Would you write "set of transitions"? Or should I change the whole phrase to address transitions as a relation?

- Nested `IF-THEN-ELSE` expressions are an extrapolation of these problems and can over-constrain some branches if not done carefully. Using different actions defining its conditions explicitly leaves less room for implicit wrong constraints that an `ELSE` branch allows. See the example below.

Assuming `C1()` is a condition for `A1()` and `C2()` is a condition for `A2()`:

```tla
Next == IF C1() 
          THEN A1()
          ELSE 
            IF C2() 
              THEN A2()
              ELSE A3()
```

What if `C1() /\ C2()` is true? In this case, only `A1()` would be enabled, which is incorrect. 

```tla
Next == \/ /\ C1()
           /\ A1()
        \/ /\ C2()
           /\ A2()
        \/ A3()
           
```

> This second definition can allow more behaviors than the first one (depending on whether `C1()` and `C2()` overlap), and therefore is safer in most cases.

Reviewer: This is a bit disingenuous, IMO. If you _wanted_ to define the behavior written in ITE, your disjunction would be _less_ readable, not more, and more prone to errors.
>This second definition can allow more behaviors ... and therefore is safer in most cases.

I disagree, the assumption that allowing more behaviors is safer is questionable.

Author: > If you wanted to define the behavior written in ITE
This is a idiom, the aim is to help people decide what they want when they are not sure. I wrote this assuming a lot of people use ITE just because they are way more used to programming languages than logic. My point in this example is: if you have a bunch of independent "when the state is this, do that" , its better to use a disjunction, but most people will use ITE because that's how you do it in programming languages. 

As for allowing more behaviors being safer: yeah, that's kinda pretentious, I'll get rid of it.

Reviewer 2: I think Gabriela's point here is that the author of such a spec would not have thought about the case of `A1` and `A2` being simultaneously enabled. A disjunction makes it clear. I agree that it is often the case that people wants to specify a concurrent system via `IF-THEN-ELSE`, which is a purely sequential operator.
